The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is cataclysms.
This is one of the most long-standing of all science fiction themes, end of the world stories,
or catastrophe stories, in which some tremendous disaster destroys civilization,
sometimes destroys all life on the earth, and even occasionally the earth itself.
One of the criteria for today's shows is that the catastrophe actually occur,
so that we'll be dealing with stories that either describe the cataclysm or the catastrophe itself,
or the aftermath of it, not simply the threat.
And mankind has been fascinated with this material for, I suppose, ever since he's been on the earth,
going back even to biblical days.
You could tie in the cataclysms of the flood and the Sumerian legends.
I think even just about every tribal society has some kind of legends of cataclysms to their habitat.
Probably even Atlantis, we could mention, is a cataclysm.
That wasn't the end of the world so much, but it's been famous as the end of a civilization,
or at least a legend of the end, and I think it's been found in many pieces of literature,
legends afterwards.
Well, ever since ancient days, we can see authors of all sorts using end-of-the-world stories.
One of the earliest in the modern tradition, I think, would be by Mary Shelley, the last man,
she was the one who wrote the book Frankenstein, which some people consider the first science fiction novel.
But in 1826, she also wrote a novel called The Last Man.
Literally, there is a last man.
There's been a plague which has destroyed or decimated the entire population of the world,
and there's one man left, and she was examining his psychology, his state of being, and so forth.
Probably one of the most famous of all was Welles' War of the Worlds, which was published in 1898.
And that is an invasion of Earth by Mars for the Martians' launch projectiles to the Earth.
When they land, the Martians set up machines which walk about the Earth on a tripod and
decimate the population by use of a heat ray.
Well, they would have been successful, except for one fact.
One of the smallest of our weapons got them, namely our bacteria.
Yeah, there was some germ they weren't immune to, and it simply wiped them out.
Else, we assume they would have succeeded in annihilating the population of the world.
And that story had a tremendous influence on people, especially, say, up in the 30s when Orson Welles
performed his famous radio show on the War of the Worlds where people actually thought they were being invaded by aliens,
and that their civilization was coming to an end.
I think that show probably set up the pattern for all the pulp aliens that you got from that point on for a number of years.
The bug-eyed monster.
There have also been many studies on crowd psychology and other types of related studies on why people reacted the way they did.
Well, also at that time, say, particularly in the 30s when Welles did his radio show and so forth,
astronomers had seen and mapped the so-called canals of Mars and the Chaperrilli's canals,
and there was speculation that perhaps there was life on Mars.
And there was also a threat of war from Europe, and that really predominated the minds of the people at the time,
and it wasn't a tremendous jump in the way they thought from a war from Europe, maybe a war from Mars.
Yeah, it was one of the first times that a concept of a real destruction of the Earth, or at least of the civilizations on it,
became plausible to the people on Earth.
And I think with that awareness, it instigated a whole series of similar subjects in science fiction,
both in books and in movies, throughout the 40s and the 50s, what we tend to call pulp science fiction now.
Even as far back as the 30s, late 20s, these pulps were dealing with alien invasion.
I think probably one of the most popular cataclysm or catastrophe stories in the pulps was the alien story,
where some tremendously ugly and powerful and malevolent bug-eyed monsters came to Earth and attempted to take it over.
And probably one of the most popular of those types of stories was Jack Williamson's Allegiant of Space.
These monsters are all set to take over Earth, and at the last moment they are averted by the actions of a hero
and a heroine in true space opera fashion.
But it wasn't until I think the late 1940s and the early 50s until authors became more serious with the theme.
And one of the classics of all catastrophe stories is Earth Abides, published in 1949 by George Stewart.
And this is one of the few books that both science fiction and mainstream readers take as a classic.
It was his only science fiction book, and probably it's one of the best novels of our century, period, science fiction or otherwise.
It's a mutated virus that wipes out the population of the Earth, or large portions of it.
There are some immune people who survive, and at first their conflict is how are they going to rebuild their culture.
In the first place they can use the remnants of what's there.
The machinery, the food, for instance, supermarkets are still stocked.
Homes still have groceries in the freezers and refrigerators.
Most of the machines still work.
So in one sense they have it pretty easy. They can use what's there to survive.
But the hero, a person named Isherwood Williams, who's called Ishe, decides that they have to build their own culture.
They can't rest on the remnants of this previous one.
So he sort of leads them toward a tribal society where they almost parallel the life and the culture of the Native American Indians.
And they do survive.
It's a hopeful book. Ishe is successful in leading his group to the values he thinks will allow them to form a viable future.
It's an idea book, but it's also an adventure book. It's fascinating.
And I think probably one of the earliest serious uses of the catastrophe or cataclysm theme.
The cinemas followed much the same trend as the literature.
At first when they came out with a cataclysm type epic, it was a world being destroyed by monsters.
Generally bug-eyed monsters at that.
But they, in turn, in the early 50s and late 60s, got more sophisticated with movies such as Seven Days in May and Failsafe.
One that was particularly effective, I think, is the 50s movie On the Beach from the book of the same name.
It was particularly effective, I think, because it came at the right time.
It was right when nuclear bombs became a reality in the world.
And all of a sudden there is this story of total nuclear destruction.
The inhabitants that are left on the planet are searching for other life and searching for any possible way of maintaining their lives.
But in the entire planet it's just decimated.
I think the people we center on first in that book and the movie both is the crew of a submarine.
Of course they've been under the water and weren't subject to the blast.
And I guess the only place left on Earth where there's any kind of life is in Australia.
The clouds, the radioactivity hasn't gotten that far.
So I believe they do find life in Australia, but it's a kind of a rarity in cataclysm books.
I would say that the majority of catastrophe or cataclysm stories center on the few survivors trying to survive, finding a way to survive,
so that there's some hope or some optimism.
But in this book there was total pessimism.
All these people were able to do is to find a way to accept death.
It was going to be the end of everything.
There was no way out of it.
And I think it had a tremendous influence on the public, especially the movie.
It was brought home to them what an actual nuclear holocaust could cause.
A book that takes a slightly different tack than that was The Last Babylon by Pat Frank.
In that particular book, the locale is Florida, and the protagonist is a civilian who has a brother who's in the military.
And he is forewarned of an international cataclysm brought on by nuclear war.
He's able to make some very preliminary efforts to get some survival gear together and whatever.
When the bomb hits, the community is spared because there are no military installations close by.
Their view of the war is mainly flashes and earth tremors off in the distance.
The community in which he lives in Florida eventually is able to put itself back together and become a working community,
although drastically changed from what it was before the war.
Many of the people who have illnesses such as Levina McGovern, a diabetic, dies when her insulin runs out.
One of the biggest shifts in the novel comes when people realize that money is no longer worth anything,
and the society changes from that purchase from a coin to a barter type system.
Many people aren't able to cope with this, and they lock themselves up in their rooms, they won't come out,
they refuse to face what's happened, and others simply commit suicide.
They are eventually able to contain their society and let it prosper, even though they have tremendous problems along the way.
I think that would be taken as an optimistic cataclysm story.
A good part of civilization does end, but the book centers on how good beginning can be.
Well, good will triumph over evil.
Well, civilization will come back, some kind of civilization, if people are smart enough to do it.
There are two other books around this time, which do about the same thing The Last Babylon does, but in different ways.
Red Alert, 1958, by Peter George, was made into the movie Doctor Strange Love,
and Level Seven, by Mordecai Roshwald in 1960.
And that book did develop the end of civilization,
button pushers below the surface of the earth sending missiles to destroy everything.
One of the later bomb stories in 1969 was by Norman Spinrad, The Big Flash.
And a particular interest here is the fact that Spinrad was identified with one of the movements in science fiction called the New Wave.
These people were interested in style, they were interested in protest, rebellion, doing things in a different way.
And Spinrad conceived of an ingenious way of ending life.
It was sort of a protest story written around the time of the Vietnam War also.
But he has a rock group called the Four Horsemen, which of course symbolically could be the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.
They are so good, and they influence the people so heavily, and all of their work deals with the bomb.
Their music reproduces the sound of an atomic bomb, their light shows reproduce one.
The people become obsessed with the bomb.
The military loves it, because they can see in the polls that people are becoming in favor of the bomb.
They like the group so well, or so influential, that public opinion is going around toward the bomb.
Let's drop it.
So the military, this is, there's a great deal of irony or sarcasm here.
The military sets up a concert for the Four Horsemen out on the Nevada desert with an atomic bomb ready to go off about five miles behind them
at the moment of crescendo in their performance.
The show is also being shown over television.
The nuclear submarines, the Polaris people are watching it.
The people in the underground silos are watching it.
And Spinrad brings all this together through a countdown, a very ingenious stylistic method he uses.
Switching from characters and counting it down until at the moment of crescendo, their music reaches the crescendo,
the explosion, the bomb goes off, and all the buttons on the Polaris subs and the underground silos are pushed by the military people who are obsessed
or almost mesmerized by this music.
And the big flash occurs, which is the, we presume the end of civilization because of nuclear holocaust.
Another end of the world story based on nuclear holocaust is Roger Zalazny's Damnation Alley, in which the United States is attacked by powers from across the sea
and re-retaliate, but much of civilization is wiped out by nuclear holocaust.
One of the military installations survives and they build a very elaborate, all-terrain vehicles and travel across the country.
The country is ravaged by electronic storms and various radiations because the earth has been tilted drastically on its axis.
I think there are also a lot of mutated creatures, huge monsters and all sorts of strange demon-like creatures out there that are dangerous besides the radiation.
They eventually make their way across the desert and during one of their campouts in a city, the earth writes itself on its axis and the skies clear up.
And on that particularly more lighter part of the book, they find another enclave of civilization and are reunited with them, and that's the end of the book.
I think that's a very un-Zalaznyan book.
It's a very strange book for Zalazny to write.
It doesn't seem to reflect his other writings. It wasn't written for the screen because it was written in 1969 and the motion picture came out in, I believe, 78.
I think we should also mention Ray Bradbury's Martian Chronicles as a cataclysm type of story, or at least some of them.
Yeah, in the Martian Chronicles the earth is destroyed by nuclear holocaust and one of the main characters back on Mars goes back and tries to save his brother, but it is unsuccessful because by the time he gets there everybody has died.
And he returns to Mars and this in turn makes it so that the people on Mars then become the Martians.
We might mention under this section on the bomb or cataclysms caused by nuclear warfare.
Again, a classic, a canicle for Libowitz published in 1960.
Walter M. Miller wrote the book. I think it was his only science fiction book.
But it's fascinating because not only is it a holocaust story, but it's the first and probably still the greatest consideration of religion in science fiction.
After the holocaust, almost all of civilization is destroyed.
And a scientist attempts to preserve knowledge.
He wants civilization to be reborn so he deliberately founds an order of monks to preserve civilization.
And for a long time after the holocaust, these monks are the only ones who have knowledge.
They preserve knowledge as the monks in the Middle Ages did.
Hundreds of years pass. Renaissance comes just as it did in actual world history.
Knowledge is disseminated among the people. Civilization rises again.
In the third part of the book they reach the point where they can again create atomic bombs.
There's another holocaust.
This time the monks gather their records, their people, they take a few women, a few children.
They take off on a huge spaceship and go to Centaurus, the star Centaurus, where we presume they will not be contaminated any further with the, well, with atomic weapons, with that kind of civilization.
But it's an incredibly complex book. That brief summary doesn't do it justice.
It's ultimately an optimistic book. It has a great deal of religious speculation in it.
And I would say it's one of the great books, not only great science fiction books, but great books of our culture.
This that you've mentioned in Canicle for Libwits brings up a subset of these kind of stories where after the holocaust has occurred,
the survivors try to repress science and keep science from occurring again so that there will be no chance of a recurrence of the bomb.
This has been treated in several stories. One of them that you mentioned, Canicle for Libwits, also lay brackets along tomorrow.
In long tomorrow, it's a post holocaust America and science has been suppressed.
And after many years, two boys have been hunting and discovered Barters Town where science is being secretly reestablished and they have a nuclear generating station.
Another story along these same lines is a juvenile novel written by Paul Anderson, The Vault of the Ages.
In this story our 16 year old hero is the son of a chief and he is trying to reestablish science in the face of the tribal doctors who are trying to suppress science.
Most of these bomb stories I think are meant by their authors' warnings.
Of course after the bomb was exploded in the Second World War, people became aware of the fact that they were living on a world that could be destroyed, civilization could be destroyed if enough of those bombs were exploded.
And there were many stories in books in which the author meant to warn people to show them what would happen if they weren't careful.
And I think most of these types of books were meant, were intended to show that.
There are many other types of cataclysm novels and movies, those dealing with natural disasters, alien intervention or disasters, attacks, whatever.
And one of those is the invasion of the body snatchers.
That's where a spore-like creature migrates across space, lands on the earth and takes root.
And pod-like creatures literally duplicate human beings, their body and their memory.
Except when they are duplicated they are different, they are part of a larger creature.
The new pod people go about systematically linking all non-pod people up and making pod people out of them.
And at the end of the book you're left to believe that civilization is eventually going to be taken over.
Yeah, that's one of the more negative ones where the aliens manage to win.
Another one like that is the puppet masters. They don't exactly win in this one, but it's by Robert Heinlein in 1951.
One of the more popular books with aliens, they take over human bodies, they attach themselves to the human body and rule it, but they are eventually defeated.
A completely different type of cataclysm book, almost unique when I would say is The Day of the Trifids from the 1950s.
The Day of the Trifids written by John Windham in 1951 is a rather unusual cataclysm story.
The earth is bombarded by a meteor shower and the meteor shower blinds everyone who's seen it.
The earth at this time is also populated by a new type of plant called the Trifid, which can move about under its own power and has a long appendage which has a sort of stinger at the end of it with a poison.
Once the majority of the population has been blinded, they're now easy prey for the Trifids.
It becomes a rather horrifying story at this point where the people are heard about like cattle by the Trifids and are slowly consumed by them.
On the human level, a young biologist who is specializing in the Trifids joins up with a group of people and they set up a society in London where they're able to survive by collecting food stuffs and dispensing them from a centralized area.
They are forced to turn away the masses of blind people except for women which they allow into their compound because it's become necessary for them to reproduce a sighted society.
All this is rather inhumane. One of the main implications of the book is showing how brutal societies had to become in order to survive.
The book ends on a rather optimistic note in that they will eventually defeat the Trifids, but they don't really say how they're going to do that.
Wyndham, I think, put a lot of ideas in his book. It's kind of heavy on ideas even though it's a good adventure story.
I think he was treating in some way social Darwinism. As you mentioned, society is kind of cruel. It's a survival of the fittest as it is out in the jungle.
And the weaker members of society, in this case of blind people, are not going to survive.
British science fiction authors I think are especially noted for their treatment of catastrophe stories.
And two authors who I can think of that do an excellent job with them after the Cataclysm story would be J.G. Ballard and Christopher Priest.
Priest's book Inverted World was published in 1974.
This is a very unusual book. It deals with an idea that Priest apparently had from some of his scientific friends.
It's designed on the idea of a hyperboloid planet. What this means is a hyperboloid is like the opposite of a sphere.
On this planet, the people who lived there would see north and south curving up and east and west curving down away from a central flat area on which they existed.
In the story, the earth is still round. It's still just the same way it is now except that there has been some kind of destruction, a crash.
The people on it are normal except for one group of people who were associated with a scientific project about 200 years back, about the time of the crash.
A scientist tried to make a machine that would create energy by contrasting a normal radioactive field with some kind of other field that he had discovered.
The only trouble is that the people who were exposed to this had their perspectives changed.
They saw the world as the reverse of a sphere, a hyperboloid where two directions like east and west would curve down as going down the sides of a mountain.
But if you looked to the north and to the south, it would curve up. This is like a saddle.
The people who were exposed to this radiation have been genetically changed and they themselves live in this perspective world.
It's still the same earth to everyone else, but to them everything is distorted away from one central point which they must maintain themselves on.
This point moves across the surface of the earth.
Therefore, their city, which is like an office building on wheels, is moved along to maintain its position parallel to that position on the earth.
The entire city has been moving for 200 years.
At the end of this time, at the time the story takes place, the city has been moving all the way across Asia and Europe and it has run up against the ocean.
They really don't know exactly how to attempt crossing it. Some of them don't even know what it is. They think it's just another big river to cross.
The other British author is J.G. Ballard, who deals with an ingenious post-catastrophe world.
First of all, Ballard seems to have made a career in writing about catastrophes.
Almost every book and story he's written deals with the end of civilization mostly due to natural causes.
He has one book where it's because of drought. The water on the world dries up, civilization ends.
He has another where civilization is destroyed by a huge wind, another in which the world becomes crystalized.
But probably as best known as the Drowned World, published in 1962.
It's a fascinating and original book, a very different one.
Solar storms have stripped the earth of its Van Allen belts and the temperatures rise drastically over a long period, but they do rise.
Civilization is destroyed and as water covers almost everything.
There are very few land masses left, but the polar caps are melting because of the heat.
The water level rises and what the world becomes is almost a duplicate of what it was like in the prehistoric days before any life was formed.
And what Ballard centers on is how man changes physically to adapt to the new world.
Most catastrophe books deal with how the hero can overcome the change or how he can re-establish civilization.
This one shows how man changes psychically because of what's happened.
And basically and briefly what happens is that people revert, they experience devolution rather than evolution.
There are cells in this new environment.
There are cells genetically remember their creation back in some primordial world in the ocean beds with the warm sun on them.
All the water, the hot sun has caused these conditions to recur.
And so what happens to people, particularly Robert Caron's the protagonist, he reverts to a cellular life.
Mentally he reverts to one. He doesn't become a cell, but his mind responds to what it's like to be a cell, experiencing life for the first time on Earth.
It's a very kind of unique book, devolution rather than evolution.
And one other British author we might mention briefly is Christopher Priest, a very well-known book, No Blade of Grass,
in which all the grains and grasses of the earth are wiped out by a virus.
All kinds of cereals are gone and this causes the end of modern civilization.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane and David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.